kubeadm: add notes about network setup to the "create cluster" doc (#43872)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm.md

After you initialize your control-plane, the kubelet runs normally.
{{< /note >}}

#### Network setup

kubeadm similarly to other Kubernetes components tries to find a usable IP on
the network interface associated with the default gateway on a host. Such
an IP is then used for the advertising and/or listening performed by a component.

To find out what this IP is on a Linux host you can use:

```shell
ip route # Look for the line starting with "default via"
```

Kubernetes components do not accept custom network interface as an option,
therefore a custom IP address must be passed as a flag to all components instances
that need such a custom configuration.

To configure the API server advertise address for control plane nodes created with both
`init` and `join`, the flag `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used.
Preferably, this option can be set in the [kubeadm API](/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3)
as `InitConfiguration.localAPIEndpoint` and `JoinConfiguration.controlPlane.localAPIEndpoint`.

For kubelets on all nodes, the `--node-ip` option can be passed in kubeadm's
`InitConfiguration.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` or

> `JoinConfiguration.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs`.

Author: we already do this in other places in the docs. they are main structures that are passed to the kubeadm init/join workflow.

there is no way to link to individual fields in https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3/

> `JoinConfiguration.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs`.

Reviewer: I'd call it something like
> `.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` inside a kubeadm configuration file
> (InitConfiguration or JoinConfiguration)

and do that even if existing pages use the `InitConfiguration.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` style.

Otherwise, I think we'll confuse readers even before they've set up their first cluster, possibly enough to put them off trying it out. It would have confused me as a beginner, for sure.

> `JoinConfiguration.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs`.

Author: updated.

{{< note >}}
IP addresses become part of certificates SAN fields. Changing these IP addresses would require
signing new certificates and restarting the affected components, so that the change in
certificate files is reflected. See
[Manual certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs/#manual-certificate-renewal)
for more details on this topic.
{{</ note >}}

{{< warning >}}
This setup of configuring all component instances with custom IP addresses is not recommended.
Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network, so that the default
gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use. On Linux, commands such as
`ip route` can be used for that purpose. If this default gateway IP is a public

> address, firewall rules must be set in place to protect the nodes and cluster.

Author: k8s components just `exit 1` in that case. i can mention it.

> address, firewall rules must be set in place to protect the nodes and cluster.

Author: added as a separate note under the warning.

`init` and `join`, the flag `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used.
Preferably, this option can be set in the [kubeadm API](/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3)
as `InitConfiguration.localAPIEndpoint` and `JoinConfiguration.controlPlane.localAPIEndpoint`.

For kubelets on all nodes, the `--node-ip` option can be passed in
`.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` inside a kubeadm configuration file
(`InitConfiguration` or `JoinConfiguration`).

{{< note >}}
IP addresses become part of certificates SAN fields. Changing these IP addresses would require
signing new certificates and restarting the affected components, so that the change in
certificate files is reflected. See
[Manual certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs/#manual-certificate-renewal)
for more details on this topic.
{{</ note >}}

{{< warning >}}
The Kubernetes project recommends against this approach (configuring all component instances
with custom IP addresses). Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network,
so that the default gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use.

> On Linux, commands such as `ip route` can be used for that purpose. If this default gateway
> IP is a public address, firewall rules must be set in place to protect the nodes and cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Linux nodes, you can use commands such as `ip route` to configure networking; your operating
system might also provide higher level network management tools.

---

If your node's default gateway is a public IP address, you should configure packet filtering or other
security measures that protect the nodes and your cluster.
```

- Packet filtering is only one option here, even if it is the most common control.
   You could have a default gateway with a public IP address but still not need packet filtering because
   the default gateway only routes packets for private networks (that use public IP address space, 1980s
   style). You might also use have bound the control plane containers to localhost and done something
   fancy with a sidecar in the same static Pod.

Author: updated.

{{< /warning >}}

{{< note >}}
If the host does not have a default gateway, it is recommended to setup one. Otherwise,
without passing a custom IP address to a Kubernetes component, the component

> will exit with an error.

Reviewer: Optionally, also answer this question: What happens if a node has two or more default routes?

(this PC I'm using right now has two default routes, with different contexts and metrics)

Author: here is the common logic used by k8s components inc kubelet, kubeadm, apiserver, etc:
```
// chooseIPFromHostInterfaces looks at all system interfaces, trying to find one that is up that
// has a global unicast address (non-loopback, non-link local, non-point2point), and returns the IP.
// addressFamilies determines whether it prefers IPv4 or IPv6
```
https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/12dc3f82eb47fc972b5be0b222f4422cb1b51612/pkg/util/net/interface.go#L309-L311

i can be more specific in the node.

Author: updated.

certificate files is reflected. See
[Manual certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs/#manual-certificate-renewal)
for more details on this topic.
{{</ note >}}

{{< warning >}}
The Kubernetes project recommends against this approach (configuring all component instances
with custom IP addresses). Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network,
so that the default gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use.
On Linux nodes, you can use commands such as `ip route` to configure networking; your operating
system might also provide higher level network management tools. If your node's default gateway
is a public IP address, you should configure packet filtering or other security measures that
protect the nodes and your cluster.
{{< /warning >}}

{{< note >}}
If the host does not have a default gateway, it is recommended to setup one. Otherwise,
without passing a custom IP address to a Kubernetes component, the component
will exit with an error. If two or more default gateways are present on the host,
Kubernetes components will try to use the one that has a global unicast IP address

> (non-loopback, non-link local, non-point2point).

Reviewer: We might want to document what happens when there are two of these (less common, but actually again this could apply to my laptop: I have wired ethernet and wireless and both interfaces have global unicast IPv6 addresses).

Author: the logic is quite complicated and a bit confusing - i.e. there are two methods.

### 1

if /proc/net/route does not exist it will enumerate interfaces using Go lang's net.Interfaces() which is OS portable. on Linux the enumeration is done with a set of POSIX syscalls, order should be the same as `ip route`. but i don't want to document such a thing as implementation can vary between kernels, CLI tools, etc. there is no guarantee of order determinism.

it would then do this:
```
// chooseIPFromHostInterfaces looks at all system interfaces, trying to find one that is up that
// has a global unicast address (non-loopback, non-link local, non-point2point), and returns the IP.
// addressFamilies determines whether it prefers IPv4 or IPv6
```
https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/12dc3f82eb47fc972b5be0b222f4422cb1b51612/pkg/util/net/interface.go#L309C1-L312

here we can say that the first IP on an interface that satisfies the above criteria is used.

### 2

if /proc/net/route exists both /proc/net/route  and  /proc/net/route_ipv6 are parsed with only default routes.
if the preferred IP family is v6, the v6 routes take precedence.

this is more deterministic. routes are appended in that same order.

then the IP is determined slightly differently, as there is a fallback to global IP on loopback:
```
// chooseHostInterfaceFromRoute cycles through each default route provided, looking for a
// global IP address from the interface for the route. If there are routes but no global
// address is obtained from the interfaces, it checks if the loopback interface has a global address.
// addressFamilies determines whether it prefers IPv4 or IPv6
```

https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/12dc3f82eb47fc972b5be0b222f4422cb1b51612/pkg/util/net/interface.go#L426-L430

@aojea can surely provide more context on this, but IMO what we can document is the following, trying to find a balance between somewhat descriptive and vague (to not enter rabbit holes):

```
If two or more default gateways are present on the host,
Kubernetes components will try to use the first one it encounters that has a suitable
global unicast IP address. While making this choice, the exact ordering of gateways
might vary between different operating systems and kernel versions.
```

After you initialize your control-plane, the kubelet runs normally.
{{< /note >}}

#### Network setup

kubeadm similarly to other Kubernetes components tries to find a usable IP on
the network interface associated with the default gateway on a host. Such
an IP is then used for the advertising and/or listening performed by a component.

To find out what this IP is on a Linux host you can use:

```shell
ip route show # Look for a line starting with "default via"
```

Kubernetes components do not accept custom network interface as an option,
therefore a custom IP address must be passed as a flag to all components instances
that need such a custom configuration.

To configure the API server advertise address for control plane nodes created with both
`init` and `join`, the flag `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used.
Preferably, this option can be set in the [kubeadm API](/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3)
as `InitConfiguration.localAPIEndpoint` and `JoinConfiguration.controlPlane.localAPIEndpoint`.

For kubelets on all nodes, the `--node-ip` option can be passed in
`.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` inside a kubeadm configuration file

> (`InitConfiguration` or `JoinConfiguration`).

Reviewer 2: A dual-stack example is provided in https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/dual-stack-support/. Could we add the dual stack example link here?

Author: added link to the page under the kubelet --node-ip example.

IP addresses become part of certificates SAN fields. Changing these IP addresses would require
signing new certificates and restarting the affected components, so that the change in
certificate files is reflected. See
[Manual certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs/#manual-certificate-renewal)
for more details on this topic.
{{</ note >}}

{{< warning >}}
The Kubernetes project recommends against this approach (configuring all component instances
with custom IP addresses). Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network,
so that the default gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use.
On Linux nodes, you can use commands such as `ip route` to configure networking; your operating
system might also provide higher level network management tools. If your node's default gateway
is a public IP address, you should configure packet filtering or other security measures that
protect the nodes and your cluster.
{{< /warning >}}

{{< note >}}
If the host does not have a default gateway, it is recommended to setup one. Otherwise,
without passing a custom IP address to a Kubernetes component, the component

> will exit with an error. If two or more default gateways are present on the host,

Reviewer 3: > the component will exit with an error

Sometimes, this may be not true. 
For kubelet, the detection order is:
```
// 1) Use nodeIP if set (and not "0.0.0.0"/"::")
// 2) If the user has specified an IP to HostnameOverride, use it
// 3) Lookup the IP from node name by DNS
// 4) Try to get the IP from the network interface used as default gateway
//
// For steps 3 and 4, IPv4 addresses are preferred to IPv6 addresses
// unless nodeIP is "::", in which case it is reversed.
```
Although there is no default route, it does not exit with -1 when DNS resolution is available.
But overall,  we recommend setting a default route for hosts.

Author: i'm a bit confused reading the kubelet code. in NodeAddress there is this comment that you mentioned and i remember it from before, but is it actually up to date?

i see a fallback to ResolveBindAddress from the apimachinery interface/IP detection code, which is what kube-proxy, apiserver, kubeadm, etc are doing:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/nodestatus/setters.go#L197-L225

which ends up as:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/util/net/interface.go#L426-L430
(as mentioned in the above comments)
https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43872#discussion_r1389732684

> Although there is no default route, it does not exit with -1 when DNS resolution is available.
But overall, we recommend setting a default route for hosts.

i can see this making sense in a cloud provider env where the cloud i responsible for assigning the kubelet IPs.

but isn't this the error that is returned if no IP can be detected:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/nodestatus/setters.go#L227-L230

Reviewer 2: If no default route on the node, IIRC, the kubeadm command will exit if not set in the configuration. (Not tested.)

After you initialize your control-plane, the kubelet runs normally.
{{< /note >}}

#### Network setup

kubeadm similarly to other Kubernetes components tries to find a usable IP on
the network interface associated with the default gateway on a host. Such
an IP is then used for the advertising and/or listening performed by a component.

To find out what this IP is on a Linux host you can use:

```shell

> ip route show # Look for a line starting with "default via"

Reviewer: What if there's more than one default route? Readers might not be sure what to do.

```

Kubernetes components do not accept custom network interface as an option,
therefore a custom IP address must be passed as a flag to all components instances
that need such a custom configuration.

To configure the API server advertise address for control plane nodes created with both
`init` and `join`, the flag `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used.
Preferably, this option can be set in the [kubeadm API](/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3)
as `InitConfiguration.localAPIEndpoint` and `JoinConfiguration.controlPlane.localAPIEndpoint`.

For kubelets on all nodes, the `--node-ip` option can be passed in
`.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` inside a kubeadm configuration file
(`InitConfiguration` or `JoinConfiguration`).

For dual-stack see
[Dual-stack support with kubeadm](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/dual-stack-support).

{{< note >}}

> IP addresses become part of certificates SAN fields. Changing these IP addresses would require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IP addresses that you assign to control plane components become part of their X.509 certificates'
subject alternative name fields. Changing these IP addresses would require
```

signing new certificates and restarting the affected components, so that the change in
certificate files is reflected. See

> [Manual certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs/#manual-certificate-renewal)

Reviewer: OK, but this is actually replacement rather than renewal.

Author: since it's not possible to change a certificate in-place, the process is always re-place. although, it's documented as renewal.

Reviewer: A renewal typically means that the new CSR and old CSR only differ by their validity period, and the motivation for renewal is expiry (ideally “imminent” rather than “recent”).
Different issuers / trust anchors have their own specific policies around whether it's a renewal or not.

I mention this because readers might think that renewal isn't the process they want.

for more details on this topic.
{{</ note >}}

{{< warning >}}
The Kubernetes project recommends against this approach (configuring all component instances
with custom IP addresses). Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network,
so that the default gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use.
On Linux nodes, you can use commands such as `ip route` to configure networking; your operating
system might also provide higher level network management tools. If your node's default gateway
is a public IP address, you should configure packet filtering or other security measures that
protect the nodes and your cluster.
{{< /warning >}}

> {{< note >}}

Reviewer: A note, a warning, and a note? Not ideal, but we can go with it.

Author: a better structuring can be done. yet nobody gave better ideas.
